maintain: Improve Chapter 14 (#710)
cairo-book/cairo-book: src/ch14-02-contract-functions.md

# Contract Functions

In this section, we are going to be looking at the different types of functions you could encounter in Starknet smart contracts.

> Functions can access the contract's storage easily via `self: ContractState`, which abstracts away the complexity of underlying system calls (`storage_read_syscall` and `storage_write_syscall`). The compiler provides two modifiers: `ref` and `@` to decorate `self`, which intends to distinguish view and external functions.

Reviewer: nitpick

State = Storage + Events (i would say)

```suggestion
Functions can access the contract's state easily via `self: ContractState`, which abstracts away the complexity of underlying system calls (`storage_read_syscall` and `storage_write_syscall`). The compiler provides two modifiers: `ref` and `@` to decorate `self`, which intends to distinguish view and external functions.
```

Author: done

Note that the `constructor` function **must** take `self` as a first argument, corresponding to the state of the contract, generally passed by reference with the `ref` keyword to be able to modify the contract's state. We will explain `self` and its type shortly.

## 2. Public functions

As stated previously, public functions are accessible from outside of the contract. They are usually defined inside an implementation block annotated with the `#[abi(embed_v0)]` attribute, but might also be defined independently under the `#[external(v0)]` attribute.

The `#[abi(embed_v0)]` attribute means that all functions embedded inside it are implementations of the Starknet interface of the contract, and therefore potential entry points.

Annotating an impl block with the `#[abi(embed_v0]` attribute only affects the visibility (i.e., public vs private/internal) of the functions it contains, but it doesn't inform us on the ability of these functions to modify the state of the contract.

```rust,noplayground
{{#include ../listings/ch14-building-starknet-smart-contracts/listing_01_reference_contract/src/lib.cairo:impl_public}}
```

> Functions, either public or private, can access the contract's storage easily via `self: ContractState`, which abstracts away the complexity of underlying system calls (`storage_read_syscall` and `storage_write_syscall`). The compiler provides two modifiers: `ref` and `@` to decorate `self`, which, in the case of public functions, intends to distinguish view and external functions.

Reviewer: I think this is a repetition of the same thing above

Author: oh yes true

> Similarly to the `constructor` function, all public functions, either standalone functions annotated with the `#[external(v0)]` or functions within an impl block annotated with the `#[abi(embed_v0)]` attribute, **must** take `self` as a first argument. This is not the case for private functions.

### External functions

External functions are _public_ functions where the `self: ContractState` argument is passed by reference with the `ref` keyword, which exposes both the `read` and `write` access to storage variables. This allows modifying the state of the contract via `self` directly.

```rust,noplayground
{{#include ../listings/ch14-building-starknet-smart-contracts/listing_01_reference_contract/src/lib.cairo:external}}
```

### View functions

> View functions are _public_ functions where the `self: ContractState` argument is passed as snapshot, which exposes only the `read` access to storage variables, and no storage write can be made via `self`. The compiler will mark their `state_mutability` to `view`, and view functions can be queried via `starknet_call` on Starknet, which will not create a transaction and hence will not change the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
View functions are _public_ functions where the `self: ContractState` argument is passed as snapshot, which only allows the `read` access to storage variables, and restrict writes to storage made via `self` by causing compilation errors. The compiler will mark their `state_mutability` to `view`, and view functions can be queried via `starknet_call` on Starknet, which will not create a transaction and hence will not change the state.
```

Reviewer: > and view functions can be queried via `starknet_call` on Starknet, which will not create a transaction and hence will not change the state.

While factually true, you can also use `starknet_call` on external functions. This will not trigger a tx and not change the state, but you could create a function like

```rust
fn foo(ref self: ContractState) -> u64 {
     return self.bar.read();
}
```

and that would work

Author: done

```rust,noplayground
{{#include ../listings/ch14-building-starknet-smart-contracts/listing_01_reference_contract/src/lib.cairo:view}}
```

### State mutability of public functions

> However, as you may have noticed, passing `self` as a snapshot only restricts the storage write access via `self`. It does not prevent state modification via direct system calls or calling another contract. Hence the read-only property of view functions is not enforced on Starknet and a view function can be defined and invoked to change states. In conclusion, even though external and view functions are distinguished by the Cairo compiler, **all public functions** have the potential to modify states on Starknet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as you may have noticed, passing `self` as a snapshot only restricts the storage write access via `self` at compile time. It does not prevent state modification via direct system calls,  nor calling another contract that would modify the state. 

The read-only property of view functions is not enforced on Starknet, and sending a transaction targeting a view function _could_  change the state. In conclusion, even though external and view functions are distinguished by the Cairo compiler, **all public functions** have the potential to modify states on Starknet.
```

Author: done
